Hi listeners, welcome back to No Priors.
Today I'm here with Saji, the co-founder
and CEO of Benshell, the system of
record for [music] biotech R&D. Today we
talk about the state of AI and bio,
[music]
Ben's bet on AI agents to help
scientists make better decisions,
experiment faster, and deliver drugs
more effectively. [music]
why drug programs are so expensive and
fail so often and how to build a culture
of science and software together.
[music]
Saji, thanks so much for being here.
>> Thanks for having me, Sarah. Excited to
be here.
>> Okay, so for our general listener base,
can you just give us an overview of what
Benchling is and sort of the scale of
the business today?
>> Sure. Uh so I'm one of the co-founders
of Benchling. Uh we make modern software
for scientific progress. Uh so started
the company about 13 years ago. It's
been been a long time.
>> Oh my god.
>> I know. Uh so I'm a software engineer by
background but I worked in a biology
lab. I was like really interested in
medicine um and coming from the world of
software and software developers have
amazing tools for working on code and
for for collaborating. And when I got to
the the biology lab I found that
scientists had paper notebooks and
spreadsheets that would sit on their
desktops and like it was terrible. Uh
and so it's really hard to work together
and I think that was really frustrating
for me personally and you know I thought
a little bit naive at the time I I
thought how hard would it be to build
good tools for for scientists and so I
started working on benchling uh which
helps scientists design molecules plan
their experiments out run those
experiments in the lab get the data
organize it analyze it and then share it
with their colleagues today we work with
about 1300 biotech and pharma companies
uh scientists at over 7,000 academic uh
institutions universities all all around
the world and our software powers you
know household names like Madna and Seni
and Eli Liilly and and Regeneron but
also like cutting edge biotech startups
you know the you know future AI biotechs
like Isomeorphic Labs and Zera and and
companies like that so we get to we get
to see the innovation happening across
the entire biotech sector and then build
software that helps power it. I'm super
excited to like actually use that
vantage point and ask you a bunch of
questions about bio and the macro. But
just so people who don't come from the
domain can picture it a little bit
better. I think like you know I can
picture like gene sequences.
>> Sure.
>> And like the assay like said yes or no
like what other types of what is the
data that's actually inventing?
>> Uh I think what's really interesting for
everyone to understand is like making a
drug. There's like 9,999 steps in making
a drug after you come up with a
molecule. So you have to to to make a
medicine you have to find a biologically
meaningful target in in the body
something you want a drug you have to
design a molecule to optimize that
molecu you have to test that molecule in
petri dishes and cell lines in animals
uh various kinds of animals then
eventually you get to the point where
you can take it to a clinical trial and
you're testing it in subsequently larger
groups of humans all the while you're
figuring out how do I manufacture this
thing and develop a process to make it
scale economically safety with high with
with quality all while navigating
regulatory bodies so that eventually in
7 to 10 years you can have a drug that
you give to people commercially and even
then there's still still more work
there. Um so it's just incredibly long
and complex process and where Benchling
focuses is all of the scientific data
that comes out of the lab. Everything
from all the different types of
molecules that are being created to how
they're related to the work that went
into creating them to the different
types of tests that you're running on
them to the data coming back from the
animals to the you know scaleup data
coming out of the fermentors when you're
figuring out the process to manufacture
it. All of that incredibly rich and
heterogeneous scientific data has to be
brought together in one place organized
made searchable so that scientists can
make decisions based on it. If we go
zoom out uh for people just like looking
at biotech from the outside um it seems
a very macro sensitive industry right
and we are perhaps coming out of like
kind of an ugly period. Can you just
characterize like where we are in the
biome macro cycle?
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I'm definitely not a
sort of macro specialist otherwise it
probably be you know investor or
something like that but it's all your
customers.
>> Yeah it is. Uh I would say like biotech
has it is definitely an industry that
has gone through cycles. We're probably
like the last couple years are probably
like the equivalent of like the.com bust
happening for biotech. Yeah, it's been
it's been a tough time. Covid was sort
of the peak when mRNA was this thing
that kind of like reopened the world and
you know there was a lot of generalist
money that came in uh and a lot of
exuberance and excitement and it's not
you know the the sort of com bust
equivalent wasn't just because of that.
there was, you know, changes in interest
rates, tariffs, regulatory uncertainty,
China, um, a bunch of different factors
and some including like scientific
technologies that we got really, really
excited about that are still very
important and promising but maybe
haven't become commercially successful
as fast as people wanted. So, a whole
whole confluence of factors there, but a
>> what are you referring to in terms of
scientific knowledge that got people
hyped? Yeah, like uh I would say there's
a lot of generalist excitement for gene
editing, cell and gene therapies, RNA
and all of these are
>> so new delivery methods.
new like I would call them kind of
categories or form factors of medicines
modalities is the word but like you know
the last the last decade actually maybe
even longer of biotech has really been
this story of new categories of
medicines being sort of invented and and
and uh taken to patients and some of
these like there are approved gene
editing medicines there are approved
cell therapies where you're
reprogramming the patient's immune
system there are approved gene therapies
there's approved mRNA medicines so these
are real categories ories, but I think
investors and companies got very excited
and put a lot of money into these
categories and we're kind of in the
trough of disillusionment for some of
them now.
>> And my understanding is that they have
taken longer and been more expensive.
Yes.
>> Than people expected than investors
expected.
>> Absolutely. in in 2021, every biotech
was getting told by investors like you
need to build a platform company that's
going to cure a bunch of different
diseases and here's hundreds of millions
of dollars and capital is free and
investors can change their strategies a
lot faster than companies can and you
know a lot of those companies because
they were taking such a big risk on like
a new form of technology we're going to
be the next RNA company next cell
therapy company they picked uh diseases
that might have had been like simpler
problems to solve with smaller patient
populations and then all of a sudden u
investors change their minds, platforms
are no longer valuable. You're working
on a thing that like is just supposed to
be a proof of concept and all of a
sudden it's like defining you and so
it's a really tough spot for those
companies to be in.
>> What's the relevance of China in all of
this?
>> I think so if the last decade was about
sort of biologics and these new
modalities I think the next is going to
be about speed and cost like people want
more drugs and they want them cheaper
and China is very good at things related
to speed and cost. And so all of a
sudden in the last couple years you've
seen this rise of Chinese biotech
companies that are able to create
molecules and bring them to patients in
clinical trials in China just early
phases of clinical development uh really
fast and really cheap even in some of
these new modalities. And so we've seen
this huge uptick in pharma going to
China and buying molecules that they
typically would have bought from
American biotechs.
>> And this is like top 30 pharma.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. These are the biggest
companies in the world. the Mercs and
Fizers and Lilies and and so forth. Many
of them have like gone to China and
bought molecules that historically they
would have bought from American
biotechs.
>> Are there medicines that people would
recognize
>> like in market today?
>> One of the most notable medicines that
people might recognize is called Carviki
and it's a Johnson and Johnson medicine.
So Johnson and Johnson partnered with a
Chinese biotech called Legend Biotech.
They saw the data that Legend presented
and you know it was a time when people
were pretty suspicious and so they were
like ah it's like
>> the data is probably not going to
replicate. It might not be real but like
J&J I think saw it and realized how
promising it was and they've taken it
and it's a it's actually a cancer
imunotherapy. Um so it kind of
reprograms the human immune system. I
think it's for uh multiple myoma. Um and
like that that medicine is very
commercially successful and widely
distributed in the US to to those cancer
patients. What's been the um reaction of
like western biotechs to this?
>> Um it's a mixed bag. Uh I think there's
some folks who are like it's you know
kind of inspired that American biotech
needs to be faster, cheaper, more
competitive. There's some more
nationalistic reactions I think of like
hey like well there's different
regulatory or ethical standards over
there. Are the data are they all going
to replicate? So some skepticism as
well. But by and large, I think it's
like very much here to stay that China
is going to be like a major major
biotech player.
>> Uh I do want to get to
>> Yeah, we can spend this whole time
talking about macro.
>> Yeah, I want to get to the meat of our
discussion which I also think is um you
know there's some premise that like the
answer to faster, cheaper, better might
in part be AI in biotech. Yeah, I I
think I I I believe that now and it's
it's really interesting to see like the
general public, you know, big tech
startups, the model labs, everyone is
saying like AI is going to cure a
disease. So, it's very good that
everyone's excited by that.
>> You I don't think of you I think an
amazing CEO, but not really a uh content
marketing guy to date and you wrote an
essay very recently that I thought was
amazing about u how we can possibly
change like the scientific field in
biotech with AI. Can you give us the
cliff notes on it and then we'll link it
in the show.
>> Absolutely. Um yeah, I I I think like
maybe to step back like one thing I just
like wish people would appreciate more
is like medicines are medicines are
magic. Uh I think I think like we take
for granted how awesome medicines are.
>> I think 9% of healthcare spend
prescription drug sales are 9% of
healthcare spending in the US. Like we
have obviously this healthcare cost
problem, but drugs are this amazing ROI.
And the best part about drugs is they go
generic. So a drug today is only going
to get cheaper over time and it works
just as effectively. I take a statin
today that probably costs like nothing
and like 20 years ago it was some
expensive medicine. Um and that's like
>> it's not obvious any other part of the
healthare system gets cheaper over time.
>> It's not. Yeah. The rest of healthcare
is very labor dependent and labor
generally gets more expensive over time.
I am I'm very optimistic for AI to help
there too. But you know drugs are this
amazing thing. we should want more of
them. And then we get to like stockpile
more and more of these amazing
medicines. But uh it takes over $2
billion generally about 10 years to
bring a medicine to market. And most of
those medicines will fail very late in
this process. You get 7 to 10 years in
you've spent hundreds of millions of
dollars and clinical trial fails.
Medicine is not safe or not effective.
And so it's an unbelievably like
difficult pursuit. Uh, it is probably
easier at this point to send things to
space or to put people on the moon than
it is to get a new medicine approved.
And I know $2 billion probably isn't
that, you know, I feel like AI has
desensitized us all. You know,
everything is like, you know, hundred
billion dollar data centers and and
whatever. Like $2 billion, like what's
that? But when there's that high of a
failure rate, it's very difficult for
investors to to underwrite that. and and
that was you know while we had all these
new categories of medicines being uh
kind of uh invented over the last decade
uh I think that's like that's important
and it's here to stay but like the the
industry has to change like the pressure
on biotech to be faster and cheaper is
just higher than it's ever been before I
think a lot of that cost comes from how
artisal the industry is like biotech is
this place where if you look I sort of
take the digital and physical realms for
a second uh they've actually done a good
job of systematizing the physical realm.
You you you brought up sequencing
earlier, like aluminina's put sequencers
on every single bench in every single
lab and now sequencing is this
accessible tool to all of science. You
could say the same thing has happened
with different like reagents and lab
consumables and and things like that.
But if you look at like the the digital
realm where it's like uh how people
collaborate, how data is structured and
shared, the workflows that are used uh
in in science which is all about
collecting data. Um, all of that's
basically bespoke and invented oneoff by
every every company. It's because those
companies are playing kind of a sort of
a one-time game because the the process
is so long that you're sort of just
trying to survive until you get six,
seven years in, you show some clinical
success and a pharma company comes and
buys you. So, you're not really like
building for scale and building for
durability.
>> That seems like it also comes from some
of the structure of like where the
innovation happens, right? Because if
you were doing it across a whole
portfolio and actually starting at zero
and you owned the innovation, then you
would invest in the systems.
>> Totally. Yeah. If you if you were
setting out to build a company that was
going to you wanted to build the next
great pharma company and have a whole
portfolio of medicines, you'd probably
care a lot about that. But that's such a
that's like a high capital, long-term,
high-risisk thing to do. It's very hard.
And after seven, eight years and you
have some good clinical data, like like
do I roll the dice again and keep going
for another 10 or do I sell? So I think
like because it's so artisal, there's
this huge opportunity now with AI to get
more shots on goal faster, cheaper, make
better molecules and then bring them to
the clinic safely and faster. And I
think that's that's the that's the big
opportunity. People get very focused on
clinical trials um because they're like
the biggest the biggest line item and
they're important, don't get me wrong,
but I think it's actually a bit of a red
red herring where uh yes, they're
operational problems like some studies
are designed badly. it's hard to recruit
patients. Sticker price is really big,
but at the end of the day, like a lot of
molecules are just not good and so we
need better molecules and we need to
move them to people faster. One other
criticism that you kind of imply in your
essay as well of like why the industry
isn't more efficient is that even the
large pharma companies are not as good
at buying innovation and finding it as
they could be, right? And so examples of
JLP1s and Katruda, like some of the
amazing breakout successes were not
super obvious to the buyers.
>> Yeah, I think I think those two stories
are are really interesting. And
>> there's a great quote from Daario, the
anthropic CEO, and his his his kind of
essay about the returns to intelligence
in scientific progress are very high.
And I
>> talking about machines of love and
grace. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So the returns to intelligence are
very high. And I think like the stories
of GLP1s and Q Truda are like great
great examples of that. So GLP-1s
obviously have just transformed obesity
as like a treatable disease when by the
way it was like a totally unfundable
category of things like 5 years ago.
>> Why do you think it was unfundable?
>> Uh I think like again because we know so
little about biology and there are so
many failures in that space and again
running a clinical trial for obesity
where you need huge populations of
people that you monitor for very long
periods of time like super super
expensive and everything has failed
before like pharma companies generally
aren't willing to underwrite that stuff
sometimes. I mean neurodeenerative
diseases are the same way like
Alzheimer's is this like graveyard of
billion dollar billion dollar failures
and like it's getting back in now but
there's a period of time where everyone
left the space and so but the core
science for GLP1s was kind of sitting on
the shelf in some sense like it's been
known since like the '9s um and so it
took some insights and conviction and
then all of a sudden like we have this
category defining medicine that's going
to go on to probably be the the
bestselling drug of all all time and
that's happening and then ke is a
similar story where there's a molecule
that's gone through a couple different
acquisitions and it's almost like it's
at the bottom of some list to be like
outlicicensed and sold off
and then a competitive thread pops up
and someone sees that hey this is kind
of like Kitruda and so and you know you
know credit to Merc they had the courage
to go allin after they realized what it
what it could be. So it's just another
example of like there's there's a lot
it's a pretty inefficient system and
people are pretty they're rational
actors. It's just that we don't know a
lot about biology and our ability to
predict what's going to happen in the
clinic is so poor and the cost to get
there and to make those decisions is so
high. And so if you can get to the
clinic fast or cheaper, like failure in
the software world is you work on a
product for a year or two, you spend a
couple million bucks and like it doesn't
work. But like in biotech, you're
underwriting, you know, four, five, six
years, big team, hundreds of millions of
dollars. So like how do you compress
that so you get feedback faster?
>> So Benchling is a system of record
company. It's a data platform. What is
benchling AI?
>> Benching AI has kind of two two major
components to it. The first is tools for
simulation. So this is taking open-
source proprietary company's internal
models and making them accessible to
scientists directly in their workflow.
So the right model at the right moment
in the scientific workflow already set
up so that a wet lab scientist without
computational skills can use it
effectively and then the results are
linked to all of their other information
in benchling. And then we also see that
lading up to being able to help
scientists recommend like help recommend
for scientists the next best experiment
to run based on all the work they've
done in the past plus all the public
literature available. And so we think
it's like an exciting way to approach
the the co-scientist problem. Then the
other facet of benchling AI is agents
that automate work for you. And so we've
released this deep research agent. It
works similar to the deep research
agents from from Anthropic and and other
foundation labs. But what it does is it
works over benchling data with the
context of the benchling data model. And
so it enables scientists to ask these
very difficult and science is
fundamentally about like asking and
answering questions. And so for our
customers, it helps them to do a type of
question that previous in the past would
have taken weeks or months to do and and
do that in just you know a couple hours.
So, a great example of this is we had a
customer that was getting ready to run
some mouse studies and uh they were
looking at 20 different mouse models and
they used a deep research uh our deep
research capability to look at all the
historical mouse studies that they had
run and it turned out that uh a bunch of
the mouse models that they were about to
like investigate which would have taken
8 months huge cost big experiment to run
uh someone had already done before and
it was trapped in some lab notebook from
you know many years ago from a company
that had been bought. and all the people
were long gone. And so there's so much
of science that lives in like folklore
and institutional knowledge and that's
just kind of lost over time. And so we
sort of view this as being able to
unlock like memory for these
organizations and help make scientific
data reusable over over time
>> and they could just accelerate because
they didn't have to do that piece of
experimentation anymore.
>> Exactly. And so we're working towards a
world where like there are AI agents
that can do all sorts of different tasks
in the scientific process. Whether it's
generating reports and asking questions
or it's even like composing experiments
from while you're in the lab with with
voice and vision and and things like
that.
>> If you project out a few years like
everybody loves to talk about this idea
of like the AI scientist a lot of
autonomy AI co-scientist what do you
think is the role of um scientists like
a couple years out.
>> Oh wow that's so interesting. So yeah,
when I hear from AI scientists, I think
it definitely evokes this image of a
kind of fully AI, you know, design,
make, test, analyze loop and we'll sit
back and let the robots give us drugs
and like
>> while I would I would love for that to
happen and I'm I'm maybe more optimistic
on a longer time scale we will get
there. I think in the short term I'm
next one to two years, which you know
already feels like an eternity in AI
time. I'm I'm a little bit more bullish
on sort of the augmentation model. Like
I kind of think of it as like a Whimo
versus Tesla approach where you can you
can do the Whimo approach to autonomy.
You just need a lot of money and a lot
of patience and it's going to take it's
going to take some time. I think the the
Tesla approach has been a little bit
more I would say taking steps. Um I
don't want to call it incremental cuz
it's it's not. Um, and so, uh, I think
if you can kind of get those
ingredients, take the Whimo approach,
which some companies have, that's
awesome. But I think for the the rest of
science, there's a huge opportunity to
just like, uh, make things better one
experiment at a time and pick off a lot
of low hanging fruit and see if we can
get 7 to 10 years down to 2 to 3 years
and a lot fewer specialized roles and a
lot cheaper to bring bring a drug to
market. I think actually like radiology
is like an interesting parallel where I
feel like ML people have been saying
radiologists are going to go away for
for 10 years. Uh but I think the model
that's worked
>> I think like 40. Yeah,
>> probably. I think the model that's
worked there though is like kind of the
co-pilot model. And truthfully, like at
the at the end of the day, you probably
like, you know, with a radiologist, you
probably need a human to be accountable
for those decisions. It's not just about
the technology. Like someone someone's
got to be there to like I don't know get
sued if something goes wrong. Yeah, I
mean that makes sense to me in clinical
practice. I'm I'm more hopeful that like
some of the experimental decisions can
be more automated. But one question that
I think biology um faces
>> uh that other fields in AI face as well
is the question of like how do you make
these agents like useful transparent to
um specialists outside of the domain,
right? So if you think about engineers
generating a ton of code, like there's a
lot of looks good to me. I didn't really
read it. I don't know if that's a good
architectural decision. Like what's
happening? How do you how do you think
about that for like for example wet lab
scientists and computational analysis?
They don't necessarily like deeply
grock.
>> Yeah. I I think right now when I when I
look at biotech, we are in so that's
absolutely like the right point of like
are scientists going to trust this and
how do we know if it's accurate? right
now I would say like there's been
amazing advances in capabilities that
scientists could use in the life
sciences uh from the foundation model
labs from bioai companies from from
everyone it's really awesome but I think
we're like we've got GPT but there's no
chat like that that's kind of how I
think about it like I think
>> the chat and I mean chat metaphorically
like that was the interface that made
things really take off in in software
and I don't think it's like really hap
we haven't figured out what that is in
in bio yet with some ideas, but by and
large and I just got back from a a month
on on the road and you I was in Boston,
London, bunch of other places that are
sort of scientific capitals outside of
SF and like most people aren't really
using that much AI and R&D yet.
>> They all want to, they're primed to, but
there's a lot of concerns about
accuracy, IP, security, legal, and I
think the farther you go from SF, the
the like larger those concerns concerns
get. And so you're optimistic that you
can make a lot of the like context value
whatever is important for scientists in
different domains to understand about an
output like legible through the product
itself.
>> Yeah. I think that's like I I think
>> legible enough to be useful. Yeah.
>> I think in a vertical I think 90% of the
work is actually like translation. It's
taking something and making science
making sure scientists trust it. It's
the right point in their workflow. It's
easy to use and it's and it's accurate.
I think the AI that wins is going to be
the one that people actually use.
>> Give us the temperature check of like
what large pharma and your customer base
thinks about AI right now. They've got
these AI officers.
>> Oh yeah, there there there's there's
excitement uh for sure. There is
optimism and belief.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh I think they're pretty pragmatic
though. Uh and I think uh they're all
looking to transform, but they're
they're being methodical. Like I would
say most of the large pharma at this
point that I've worked with like you
know they've got co-pilot and things
like that and they're doing a lot of
pilots of different technologies but I
haven't seen their R&D orgs transformed
yet. Now the one place I would say that
pharma has really leaned in and has an
advantage is they have incredible data
generation capabilities and so many of
them can and should be training models
>> like experimental data generation. they
can generate data to train their own
models at a scale that most biotech
startups can't can't match. So I think
while it's early on sort of the agentic
how we work side I think you're going to
see very unique models come out of
pharma where their computational
scientists are building interesting
predictive models that you know similar
to what's happening in the open source
world. What do you like can you help
characterize um what useful models we
already have on the discovery side and
then like where you think we are in the
sort of cycle of having you know enough
to make a real change in the um
>> overall cycle time
>> or uh rate of success whatever you think
is more important here.
>> Yeah,
>> it's been really cool to see like the
whole ecosystem of these tools grow a
ton. um like open source wasn't really a
thing in biology before or in science
before and like I think in the last 2
years it it feels like a thing that's
here to stay. Um you're seeing all these
interesting models come out like the
bolts for example on the structural
prediction side. Um and I think like
that's like a really interesting thing
that's going to change change biology.
Uh I think you're seeing new approaches
to like federated learning as well. Eli
Liy put out this uh announcement about a
a project they have called Tounel Lab
where they're taking their internal
models and making them available to the
broader scientific ecosystem. So a
farmer companies saying hey you can use
our models but it's give to get so we
get to train and like it's you know
federated or and whatnot. So they don't
get to see the actual scientific data
but I think like those approaches are
like we're this is the beginning
basically and so we've got some really
cool stuff. there are there are problems
that I think are fairly tractable in
terms of structure prediction or
antibbody developability and so forth.
So like that that's really good. But
there's I would say
a lot of work in front of us in terms of
models that are sort of more predictive
of what happens when you get into
patients for example. And don't get me
wrong like discovery is really important
but there's so many other steps that
have to happen after you have a concept
molecule. Even if you're if you're much
faster for example at um making
molecules and you have a higher success
rate, you still have to come up with a
process to manufacture that molecule.
And now you have even less time to do so
if it's like a byproduct of success. And
so how do you optimize manufacturing
processes to get, you know, a lot of
yield, speed, cost out of out of a
molecule?
>> Is that like where you would say the um
highest value missing predictive model
opportunity is? Because I think a bunch
of naysayers would be like, "Okay, yes,
I've heard about AlphaFold and like
people are working on antibbody
prediction and like creation platforms,
but we are still, you know, many years
into this premise.
>> No drugs out the other end of the
pipeline that are AI discovered."
>> Yeah. I feel like the naysayers kind of
have this sort of worldview in mind
where it's like, oh, I just like type a
disease in and I like get a molecule out
and like amazing AI discovered drugs.
And this is where I go back to like my
my my mental model is like there's so
many steps. Those steps are all
cumbersome and difficult. And this is a
game of like making each single thing
better.
>> And like some of the steps matter more
than others like having the right target
or having like a great molecule
generated. Fine. But like there's still
many many years after that that we can
compress and shave off. And so right now
I would sort of almost argue that we
should be thinking about like what's the
share of experiments that have been
touched by some kind of predictive
capability, some kind of simulation or
some kind of AI. And I bet that share is
like getting higher every day.
>> Part of what I think has been really
interesting and there's like good and
bad about uh the investor enthusiasm of
uh you know both let's say AI's
potential impact on biotech and then the
potential for platform companies is this
theory that we're going to have like
very different business models in
biotech. Do you think that's going to
happen?
>> Uh I would like it to happen. I think
right now for companies I mean so one as
a as a toolmaker I think there should be
more tools. uh tools are good. Uh I do
think with some of these model companies
in the bio world, there's going to be
interesting question of do they morph
into in the fullness of time morph into
their own therapeutics companies with
their own pipelines.
>> I think it's it's unlikely. It's
possible, but it's unlikely that sort of
hey they're just going to remain pure
model companies who just do deals with
pharma where pharma, you know, pays them
$100 million upfront or something like
that and they have five customers and
and whatnot. like I feel like the uh
sort of model building is probably
commoditizing too fast for that to to be
attractable business model. But to take
that expertise and to make to be
fundamentally better at doing research
and early development to to make
molecules and sort of morphing into a
biioarma company like that seems like
one logical path. Um I think there's a
world where like and and we're
experimenting in this space where sort
of models can be more effectively
distributed to the larger bioarmmer
community. So rather than going and
doing BD deals with five companies is
actually a little bit more like kind of
a traditional software sale where you
know we we've actually got a bunch of
models in benching they're mostly open
source but also we've got you've got
chai and alpha fold things like that. Uh
is there a model where like some of
these are like pay or like fee for
service almost like SAS and the entire
biotech company's benefiting that and
you can build models and like have a
scalable business model on the other end
like I think that'd be really
interesting. Uh and then there's going
to be like more data transactions I
think as well. Like data wasn't is not
is interesting for for a field that
really depends on data as its currency.
Like everything is about data on the
molecule. You see very very few
transactions of data.
>> That's cuz no one trusts anyone else's
data. You you wait till there's a
clinical trial and the data is positive
and you buy the molecule. But you'd
think that you'd see a lot more selling
of of data before that. But you don't
because the data like it's very hard.
You don't know what format it's in. Do
you trust the way it was created? like
it's just not
>> if there's tooling and normalization
about it, you might be able to transact
on it.
>> Okay.
>> And like will people be selling like
their negative data at some point into
some pool that other people can learn
from? I don't know. There's all kinds of
crazy stuff I can think of.
>> I'm sure you've heard in the 13 years
you've been building benchling, the
conventional wisdom is that um the only
way to create value in pharma is assets,
not tools, right? Like where were they
wrong? Or maybe the tools just like
weren't that important before and they
weren't as embedded as they needed to
be. Yeah, I don't know if this is a
Thermoffisher and Danaher are like
sneaky big companies and I think people
don't don't always realize that and
they've done it largely by like
systematization of tools in the physical
realm. So like instruments, reagents,
services around them and so forth. I
think there's some kind of at least
thing that rhymes with building great
tools on the digital side. I think just
frankly like looking back the the
technology probably hasn't hasn't been
there. Like well when we started
benching in 2012 cloud was like the norm
everywhere but most of life science was
like paper on premise spreadsheets like
so like we spent the first couple years
like
>> it's wild for such an advanced field in
other areas.
>> Yeah. I mean, and that is because like
you you could argue like, hey,
we're we're it's such a like
high stakes game of poker for them that
the only thing that matters is like does
this drug get to get to get to patients
and is successful and they can, you
know, pharma has pretty healthy margins
and so like the operational efficiency
isn't always going to like improve the
the odds of of success. So we spent the
first couple years basically just
evangelizing like bring science online
like it's going to be better and then
spent the next like 10 years after that
kind of convincing people that
structured data mattered and cuz that's
that's sort of like the core premise of
bench. It's a system of record will help
you have like a data model and every
time you do experiments that data model
is getting populated with information
you can ask questions and there's a set
of people who they got it and they
believed and
>> seems obvious to tech people. It seems
obvious, but there's like it's not for
free. Like a piece of paper is much
easier and an Excel spreadsheet is much
easier. Uh but there's a set of people
who believe in a set of people who maybe
weren't convinced. But now with like AI
one, I think the benefits are a much
more immediately obvious to everyone.
And so that's going to be this amazing
tailwind to try to like do better here.
And I think it will convince a lot of
people who might have been skeptics in
the past.
>> Yes. I don't come at that from a holier
than thou view because one might
actually claim that
>> uh in venture investing the only thing
that matters is the quality of the next
decision and whether or not
[clears throat] you found the winner and
so it's a lot of tech people with a lot
of um pen and paper actually and so but
but I I think that's likely to change
>> two things one is like all the
foundation model companies deep mind
anthropic open AI they love to talk
about AI for drug drug discovery like
and you know I I think that there's
fundamentally like a mission orientation
there. I also think I'm a bit of a cynic
because it's hard to be like that's a
bad idea like that seems like just um
just roundly good for humanity if we
have more medicines as you said.
>> Yeah. It's like on the 10 years ago when
the crypto people were like ah it's all
international remittances
>> right? um like why do you think it is
like both so popular with the labs and
then even more popular over the last few
months and then like tell us about your
partnership with Anthropic. I I go back
to that sort of returns to intelligence
piece where I think science is a is a
problem that has some shake to it that
really benefits from the LLM
architecture. Like you just think about
the corpus of scientific literature as
like this vast pool of unstructured text
and like
>> these are kind of these are like roles
where these are pursuits where like
that's a ton of domain knowledge to hold
in your head and there's so much
specialization and so the idea that like
you could be like truly standing on the
shoulders of giants I think is very
appealing of I've got a scientist and
I'm an early stage biotech and some now
I can have access to the world's best
like clinical design expert or the
world's best toxicologist or or the
research assistant who can even like
read papers better than me to figure
things out. Like there's a lot about
science that again is so artisal and
inefficient that it seems like a problem
that AI is going to be be much better
at. I think that's one thing. Uh I think
the other is like I mean it is like I
think bio is I don't know like I I sort
of wonder like why don't more people
work work in bio like there are big
problems to be solved. There's an
incredible like
>> because the failure rate's so bad.
>> The failure rate is so bad and like the
the impact is huge. which I think
everyone's now seen what like GLP1s can
do. Everyone saw what co vaccines can
do.
>> Magic.
>> Yeah. It's like when it works it's magic
and like people need this stuff and so
like I don't know if AGI starts you know
automating away software engineers or
whatnot like what's left like got to
make drugs for people.
>> All right. More more scientists
>> and what about the partnership?
>> Um yeah so we have a partnership with
anthropic. Um I think we feel very we
work with we use sort of the all the
foundational model labs capabilities but
like uh we found that there's like a
strong commitment to science from
anthropic. I mean Daario's a a scientist
and so it's been really uh really good
mission alignment uh with them and I
think sort of they've expressed publicly
that science is sort of the next
frontier after after code and I think
for our customers trust is super super
important and I think their posture plus
their technology is one that's really
appeals to them and so it's one where
just at the start like benchling and
claude kind of like natively
interoperate very well so if you want to
you know work through benchling and
claude or you want to uh it works pretty
effectively so scientists can you know
generate reports ask questions and
things like that from a very simple uh
AI interface that they're they're used
to. And I think it's just like the start
with with them.
>> Can we talk a little bit about company
building?
>> Sure.
>> Just, you know, 13 years of wisdom in
like two minute takes.
>> Every mistake made at this point.
>> Maybe we'll start with the most recent
um like hard decisions, uh not mistakes.
But your co-founder Ashu gave up all his
direct reports at some point and went
all in on it. I called I called a bunch
of friends around this company um and
our mutual friends. Um that is a that's
a big decision like when that happened
how did you make the decision because
you guys started way before AI was
working at scale.
>> Yeah. It's funny we we I think we
started early but at the same time I
feel late still.
>> Okay. All this
>> I Yeah. You know one of the interesting
things is like I feel like the power of
being a co-founder is actually just in
moral authority. And I think like this
was a it was a pretty controversial
decision in our company and we needed
someone who had the right I guess
willingness to like a like I don't need
any of my Legos anymore. Anyone else can
have them
>> and like b if I look stupid that's okay.
>> And so like it's it's funny. He wrote
this wrote this post of like I'm
quitting my job to like do this other
thing. And I had a bunch of customers
call me and they were like oh my god I'm
I'm so sorry your co-founder quit. Is
everything okay? I was like oh no no
[laughter] metaphorically
>> metaphorically didn't quit. Just going
going fulltime on AI. Yeah.
>> And it was it was controversial like
biotech obviously like had this kind of
level bust and so a lot of our you know
our team is is feeling like hey we got
to focus on like the basics with our
customers the market's tough right now.
You have some companies that are laying
people off shutting down. Like isn't
>> how do you invest like that?
>> Yeah. Isn't AI like a distraction? But
like we were actually really fortunate.
I think we had good sort of outside the
building perspective. Asha was very
hands- on keyboard himself and that's
how he got convinced. I think he was
like playing with one of the models like
during Christmas or something like that
building for himself and I think that
really really inspired us and and also
like we we realized like if we don't do
this for our customers like who is going
to do it like again it goes back to
needing to translate some of these
amazing things that come out of Bay Area
and Silicon Valley into like useful
vertical applications in in very complex
regulated domains that we felt like
we're we're the right people for
>> maybe because there are a bunch of
entrepreneurs uh listening to this
podcast as well who are looking at
industries that are complex and
regulated and want to try to bring I
don't know the cloud and then AI to them
[laughter] like what has been hardest
what are some lessons from that
>> my I think like the my like most trusted
algorithm for this is like go talk to
customers and all the I know super
obvious right uh but all the times in
which like I feel like the company has
been like at its lowest or at its worst
or like I'm feeling at my lowest it's
because I've gotten too far from
customers and like product market fit is
this moving target and sometimes your
market changes like our market changed
of like you had a bunch of biotech
companies that were going to take over
the world and then like then they
weren't and so like I still spend and
maybe this is a vertical thing I
probably spend 30 40 50% of my time
talking to customers still and I think
of myself as like the I need to go
really deeply understand their problems
and how they're changing and I need to
go bring that back to the company and
like that's the thing I have to role
model so the whole company does it and
that's the number one piece of advice
I'd give
So that answers part of one question
from another friend who used to work for
you. He said that Saji's amazing at like
understanding the macro of the company
and then like being deep in the detail
on everything especially with customers
but given you know benching is a
complicated company biology is a
complicated field like how do you decide
what to focus on and then like focus
your team on?
>> I app that's a nice compliment though
it's like telling someone they have a
large context window.
>> It is good model man.
>> Uh thank you. Thank you to whoever said
that kind thing.
>> It was Malay. Hi Malay. Yeah. [laughter]
>> Um I you know if one of the most
interesting things about being in a
vertical is you talk to all your
customers and they all because no one
they're underserved like there just you
know the world of life science software.
There aren't it's not like go to market
tools where there's like 10,000
companies like
>> much less great software companies.
>> Yeah. There there are just not many. And
so you have a very underserved
demographic where they're not used to
someone coming and sort of asking what
they specifically need. They're used to
very general purpose horizontal software
and trying to like
>> productivity do cluji things to make it
work, you know? Uh and so when you go
talk to them, the first reaction is
like, "Oh my god, what we do is so
unique and we're such a snowflake and
there's no way like but then you like
talk to enough customers and it turns
out they almost all want the same
thing." I find that having five 10
customers is actually like a pretty
representative model for what the entire
industry needs. you you don't want to
get like too overweighted in like one
category of medicine or one size or
something. But everything we've built
over time that has been successful is
cuz we found a couple of customers and
we got very very deep with them and we
built and built until they were like
super happy and then it took off. Uh and
like maybe that's like the YC part
that's been like programmed into me that
I've never gotten out of it of like do
things that don't scale. I feel like in
a vertical that works 10x 10x better
even for our new AI tools. We we have
all of our customer base. They're
they're available to all of our
customers now. But like we're our team
is on like daily weekly calls with five
or 10 customers to the point of like we
we had a customer yesterday, you know,
text us about like a meeting they had
with the FDA and how they like ran a
report inside of our deep research tool
and instead of taking them a day, it
took them like five minutes and it was
like perfect for them. And like that's
the level of closeness we get with our
customers.
One other unique thing um that I think
would be useful for a lot of people
today including me is benchling knows
how to get scientists to work in a
software company and work around a
software company like I work with many
more research scientists so in different
fields than well actually it's some
biome but than I uh anticipated let's
say five years ago when I was just like
>> good old engineering um like and it is
philosophically different right you have
to run programs differently you're like
Oh, you know, it's not like this is done
by the next sprint. It is we do not
know. So, how like what advice do you
have on um like recognizing that talent,
getting them to be productive, managing
it?
>> That is a really hard question. I have I
have serious battle scars uh of that.
We've had to build a very
interdisiplinary company to be
successful that if if I was only hiring
like software people who knew bio, I
would have like exhausted the pool 10
years ago. It just doesn't exist. We
have to take the software people, take
the science people, make them sit
together, learn from each other. I
actually and this is going to sound
obvious but I I've actually found that
like the most conflict has been around
the like actually like how the mission
gets solved. Um where actually a lot of
like coming from the world of science
especially academia is just a very
different incentive structure and in the
world of academia like your labor is
basically free and so like there was
like very very very cheap right grad
student labor and like the currency is
publishing a paper.
>> Yeah. and that's how you get more
funding to do more things and so forth.
Whereas in a company like we have to
sell software. Um and so like actually
the most impactful thing has been like
really a lot of repetition that in order
for us to achieve our mission and to
keep delivering great things to our
customers like we have to make money and
a lot of the tension has come from like
that the need to do that. And so making
sure our scientific teams like really
understand that the better we do as a
business, the more amazing innovation we
can bring to our customers. And by the
way, if we don't do this, who else is
going to do it? Where are the other like
next 10 companies building software for
science and R&D that are going to power
the next discoveries of these biotech
and pharma companies? Like where we're
like I think we're the only independent
like scaled player doing this at this
point.
>> Do you interview at all for this
orientation?
>> I think we try to. I I don't know that
we've like I have some amazing
predictive way to to find it.
>> I have a friend who's a founder um who
asks what I I don't find to be a
controversial question because it's
literally in my title, right? I'm a
venture capitalist, but they ask people,
including research scientists, how do
you feel about capitalism? And they
think it's a pretty interesting sorting
function. Actually,
>> I I will try that. [laughter] I'm not
recommending it but I I I do think it is
uh uh interesting the set of answers you
get actually because I I have tried it.
One more question for you on culture.
You spent a lot of time with biotech and
large pharma. You're at your core a
software person. Like what can these two
worlds learn from each other?
>> Great great question. I think the
biotech and pharma world can learn
something from how tech communicates and
tells stories. like there's the whole go
wave in tech right now that I I really
really resonates with me as a as a
founder. Uh I think like biotech and
farmer companies need to tell their
stories. Um like most people
>> This is not what I thought you were
going to say.
>> Yeah, I'm curious what you thought I was
going to say. Um most most people I
don't think could name five scientists
or five CEOs of pharma companies, but
like we could name every single like
tech CEO. Everyone knows who you say Sam
and it's like firstname basis, right?
For [clears throat] a lot of and or
Jensen or something like that. There's a
lot of heroes journey in tech.
>> A lot of heroes journey in tech. Um, but
like and I think talking about the
patients and scientists though would
like change a lot of the public
perception of biotech and science. I
don't think people know how hard it is
to like make a medicine. I mean I was
you know I was just thinking recently
like you you look at co even like madna
and fizer helped the world whatever you
feel about vaccines like they played an
important part in like helping the world
like reopen and yet like zoom gets more
credit in in co where you have Gilead
who's like you know HIV used to be a
death sentence in the 1980s and like
there was tons of panic and fear about
it in the 90s and early 2000s and like
>> Gilead's like cured HIV basically at
this point and like most people have no
idea like and so I think like because
sort of the the way they communicate is
much more about almost these like
faceless companies rather than the
people. I think it's like easy to easy
to hate on them and underappreciate. So
I think they they need to tell their
story and go go direct.
>> Um that's one thing I think on what tech
can learn from from bio is I think once
you start I think sort of tech has sort
of become everything in and sort of gone
from you know very I say the ambitions
of tech have grown a ton. Uh, and I do
think like some of these other
industries have figured something out
when it comes to rigor and validity and
accuracy and sort of move fast and break
things does work for certain domains.
But again once you get to the point
where you want to have credibility with
regulators to put things in patients you
know or make a medicine like that stuff
does come to matter and like bioarma
again for all the things that are
difficult with this has figured out how
to be safe like the US is still the gold
standard uh for how to like deliver
medicines safely to people. I think that
stuff matters more and more.
>> Yeah, it's really interesting. I was
talking to a friend who is a top
research scientist at one of the top
labs and I I asked them a very basic
question. probably a year and a half ago
about like well you know how can I how
can I better use these models in very um
quality sensitive fields and he said
just wait right like there's like you
know like why don't you just focus on
the use cases that are not as rigorous
essentially
>> and um uh this is an amazing research
scientist but I'm like that seems
unambitious right um because we there
are many benefits to intelligence uh in
these fields that are really important
to all of us and so I do feel like more
people should work with that too.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I think in Silicon
Valley sometimes it's it's a little bit
easy to like oversimplify other people's
jobs. There's a lot of complexity out
there in the world of biotech and farm
but I'm very optimistic that like the
sort of tech companies will figure out
how to make it work because I think
everyone's very excited about about AI.
>> Last question for you. Um something
you're excited about in AI outside of
bio or outside of like Benchling's
immediate purview. I guess
>> on a personal level uh I haven't written
a line of code. I had not written a line
of code in probably
>> I'm very embarrassed to say this uh
maybe eight or nine it's been
>> oh wow
>> it's been some time like I remember I
stopped coding around the time that
React started being a thing like I'm
dating I'm dating yeah all the all the
kids listening are going to turn off um
and like I've tried some of the new
agentic coding tools lately and it's
just like on a personal level fun to
just feel like the whimsy of being able
to build something very quickly again so
like that that's pretty cool. Uh that's
probably the one I'm I'm most excited
about. And then I'm excited for my like
>> parents actually uh and for them to have
like new technology that's pretty easy
for them to to access. Like my mom's a
Chad GPT user and I'm sure it's sort of
Google search++ at this point, but like
that's been like pretty cool too of like
technology that's so intuitive that like
I don't have to like go home and be IT
support at Christmas. Yeah, I think it's
actually undervalued as um just because
there are audiences that are uh
traditionally not as lucrative as like
the fast tech adopting audience of your
you know 15 to 40year-old but it is
incredibly uh wild how the UX of like
natural language and voice are
>> changing who can use it right AI
tutoring for my kids and such and same
same experience
>> learn learning is such a joy with with
AI hope I'm learning the right things
but like
>> thanks so much for doing this Saji.
>> Thanks, Sarah.
>> Find us on Twitter at No Priors Pod.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel if you
want to see our faces. Follow the show
on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or wherever
you listen. That way, you get a new
episode every week. And sign up for
emails or find transcripts for every
episode at no-briers.com.